Robert M. Ryan and Stefan Woltmann 
Center of Excellence for Field Biology, and Biology Dept. Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, TN 37042.

Geographic and Subspecies Variation in the Song Structure of the Seaside Sparrow, Ammospiza maritima

Abstract:
Geographic variation in song is common in temperate passerines, but previous studies exploring song variation in Seaside Sparrows have not examined song at a range-wide scale. We analyzed the song structure of nine subspecies of Seaside Sparrow to describe how song varies geographically and ask whether variation in song structure aligns with subspecies designations. We gathered songs from the collections of the Macaulay Library, Borror Institute of Sound, Florida Natural History Museum, and Xeno-Canto, and also recorded songs at several sites in Texas. The song of the Seaside Sparrow has a distinctive two-part structure consisting of an introduction, composed of a warble containing a variety of syllables, followed by a terminal buzz. Descriptive measures of song such as duration, minimum, and maximum frequency were recorded for the introduction and the terminal buzz. We also recorded the total number of syllables in the introduction, and the pulse period for the terminal buzz. Finally, each syllable from every song was categorized into one of six syllable types, then grouped by specific identity within each type. Using ANOVAs and PCA we explored if songs clustered geographically based on elements of song structure, syllable composition, or syllable identity. The variation observed did not partition by subspecies designation, but some features of the song do vary geographically. 

Github link:
https://rryan7591.github.io/SSP_rough

Literature sources:
Bradley, R. 1977. Geographic variation in the songs of the Belding’s Savannah Sparrow (Passerculus sandwichensis beldingi). Bulletin of the Florida State Museum of Biological Sciences 22:57-100.Ferrato, J. R., M. F. Small, T. R. Simpson, J. A. Veech, and M. H. Conway. 2014. Definitive nesting of Seaside Sparrows at Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge, Cameron County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ornithological Society 46:62-63.Hardy, J. W. 1983. Geographic variation in primary song of the Seaside Sparrow. Pages 95-98 in T. L. 5Quay, J. B. Funderburg, Jr., D. S. Lee, E. F. Potter, and C. S. Robbins, editors. The Seaside Sparrow, its biology and management. Occasional Papers of the North Carolina Biological Survey, Raleigh, North Carolina.McDonald, M. V. 1988. Status survey of two Florida Seaside Sparrows and taxonomic review of the Seaside Sparrow assemblage. Florida Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, School of Forestry and Conservation, University of Florida. Technical Report No. 32, Jacksonville, Florida.Nelson, D. A. 2017. Geographic variation in song phrases differs with their function in white-crowned sparrow song. Animal Behaviour 124:263-271Patten, M. A. 2010. Null expectations in subspecies diagnosis. Ornithological Monographs 67:35-41. 

Phillimore, A. B. 2010. Subspecies origination and extinction in birds. Ornithological Monographs 67:42-53.Podos, J., and P. S. Warren. 2007. The evolution of geographic variation in birdsong. Advances in the Study of Behavior 37:403-458Winker, K. 2010. Subspecies represents geographically partitioned variation, a gold mine of evolutionary biology, and a challenge for conservation. Ornithological Monographs 67:6-23Woltmann, S., M. Roeder, A. Xiong, C. Hill, and M. H. Conway. (in press). Additional notes on Texas Seaside Sparrows (Ammospiza maritima sennetti): an update to Griscom 1948. Wilson Journal of OrnithologyWoltmann, S., P. C. Stouffer, C. M. B. Burns, M. S. Woodrey, M. F. Cashner, and S. S. Taylor. 2014. Population genetics of Seaside Sparrow (Ammodramus maritimus) subspecies along the Gulf of Mexico. PLoS ONE 9:1-10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0112739.